# FuckBench

## What is it?

FuckBench (*FB*) is a set of Windows batch files and tools to compile from several languages into [BrainFuck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainfuck) (*BF*).

Optionally, in addition to creating BF code, FB can compile generated BF code into 
higly optimized C files using the [Esotope](https://github.com/lifthrasiir/esotope-bfc) BF to C compiler.
If a C compiler is available, a Windows executable is also created.

Currently, FB supports compiling the following languages to BF:
 * ANSI C
 * 6502 Assembly
 * [FuckBrainFuck](http://www.inshame.com/search/label/My%20Progs%3A%20FuckBrainfuck)
 
## How does it work?
 
FB includes a BF emulator for the 6502 CPU (`6502.fbf`); this allows using cross-compilers available for the 6502 CPU to create BF code.
A "linker" is provided (`CodeMerge.jar`) to "link" 6502 executable code to the emulator, creating a single BF file that can then be executed by using any available BF compiler or interpreter.

Given the generated code is not the fastest, I strongly suggest to configure a C compiler, as explained below, 
such that C code generated by Esotope can be turned into a Windows executable.

## Usage
  
### Configuration

FB relies on a set of external tools. Some of them need to be installed, as described below.
Others are made available under the `<root>\redistr` folder, for your convenience.
 
  1. Download latest FuckBench release and unzip it in a folder on your machine. We will refer to this folder as `<root>`.
  2. I strongly suggest to add `<root>\bin` to your path, such that FB tools can be invoked from any location in your machine.
     The below examples assume batch files in the `<root>\bin` folder are accessible from the current colder in the command prompt.
  3. Install [Java](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase-downloads.html).
     FB needs Java 15 or later.
	 Normally, Java installer updates PATH environment variable as required, if not, make sure the folder used by your
	 Java installation is added to the path. FB assumes `java` command will work when invoked from within any folder.
  4. Download [cc65](https://cc65.github.io/) 6502 C cross-compiler and install it as explained in the
	 "[Getting Started](https://cc65.github.io/getting-started.html)" page. Notice that *the installation folder
	 for cc65 must NOT contain any space*.
  5. Edit `<root>\bin\config.bat` and set `FB_CC65` to the folder where you installed cc65. 
  
Optional - the below steps are required if you want to compile generated BF code into C.
If you skip the below configuration, BF compilation will stop after genereating BF code.

  6. Install [Python 2](https://www.python.org/downloads/). I suggest using [WinPython](https://winpython.github.io/)
	 for easier installation; notice however that *WinPython has some limitation on the installation folder name*.
  7. Edit `<root>\bin\config.bat` and set `FB_PYTHON` to the Python interpreter executable. 
  
Optional - the below steps are required if you want to compile C code generated above into a Windows executable.

  8. Edit `<root>\bin\FB_ccompiler.bat` an adapt it to your C compiler.
    This batch file receives the name of a .c file (*without* extension) to compile and it is assumed
	to call any intalled C compiler to do the job.
	It is up to you to modify this batch file to properly invoke any C compiler you are using.
	If you are not using any C compler, just leave this file blank.

### Specifications for the BrainFuck environment

To successfully run, BF code created by FB requires a BF interpreter or compiler with below specifications;
please notice the section above explains how to use Esotope and any Windows C compiler to create Windows 
executables out of your BF generated code.

 * Unsigned wrapping 16 bit cells (0-65565).
	
 * A tape of at least 131193 cells.
   At the beginning of execution the tape head is assumed to be in the leftmost cell
   and will move ony to cells on its right.
	  
* The Windows executables created with Esotope + C compiler, when encountering a BF `,` comand will read 
  a string from console until user presses enter. The string is returned with a terminating $0A (LF) char.

  For example, when the generated BF code contains a `,` execution stops waiting for user input.
  Users enters "A1!" followed by "enter" key. BF will receive the characters with decimal ASCII code:
  $41, $31, $21, $0A in this order.
	  
  Notice that the cc65 libraries provided with FB read input until either a $00 (nul) or $0A (LF) character is returned;
  if $00 is read, it is replaced by $0A before being returned.
  
	  
### Compiling BrainFuck code

If you followed the above optional steps, you can invoke:

```
FB_bf f
```

to compile BrainFuck `f.bf` source file into `f.c` C code and corresponding executable Windows file `f.exe`.

Again, if Python or C compilers have not been configured, compilation will stop at some intermediate steps.

### Compiling FuckBrainFuck code

You can invoke:

```
FB_fbf f
```

to compile FuckBrainFuck `f.fbf` source file into `f.bf` BrainFuck code, `f.c` C code and corresponding executable Windows file `f.exe`.

Again, if Python or C compilers have not been configured, compilation will stop at some intermediate steps.

`<root>\notepad++` folder contains a custom language definition for the FuckBrainFuck language, to be used ith [Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/) editor.

### Compiling 6502 assembly

FB uses [ca65](https://cc65.github.io/doc/ca65.html), a 6502 assembler contained within [cc65](https://cc65.github.io/) 6502 C cross-compiler
to compile 6502 assembly code into a 6502 executable that is then linked to the 6502bf BF emulator to produce final BF code.

You can invoke:

```
FB_asm f
```

to compile ca65 assembly file `f.s` source file into `f.bf` BrainFuck code, `f.c` C code and corresponding executable Windows file `f.exe`.

Again, if Python or C compilers have not been configured, compilation will stop at some intermediate steps.

The file `<root>\cc65\6502bf.inc` contains a set of macros that exposes features available in the 6502bf emulator.

[Parameters](https://cc65.github.io/doc/ca65.html#ss2.1) used by the assembler can be configured in `<root>\bin\FB_config.bat`.

The code can use zeropage variables (except for 26 bytes reserved by ca65) and the whole of RAM (starting from $200),
with the exception of a software stack located in high memory. For more information, please refer to `<root>\cc65\6502bf.cfg`
configuration file and [cc65 documentation](https://cc65.github.io/doc/customizing.html).

### Compiling ANSI C

FB uses [cc65](https://cc65.github.io/) 6502 C cross-compiler to compile C code into a 6502 executable that is then
linked to the 6502bf BF emulator to produce final BF code.

You can invoke:

```
FB_cl f
```

to compile `f.c` source file into `f_c.bf` BrainFuck code, `f_c.c` C code (for `f_c.bf`) and corresponding executable Windows file `f.exe`.

Again, if Python or C compilers have not been configured, compilation will stop at some intermediate steps.

[Parameters](https://cc65.github.io/doc/cc65.html#ss2.1) used by the compiler can be configured in `<root>\bin\FB_config.bat`.

Please notice that cc65 somehow [differs](https://cc65.github.io/doc/cc65.html#s4) from ANSI C.

#### C Libraries

cc65 provides extensive C libraries covering most of the C standard ones, FB adds some (machine-dependant) functions as well.
To re-build the libraries used by FB, you can call `<root>\bin\FB_build_lib.bat`; this will compile all `.s` (6502 aseembler) and 
`.c` files under `<root>\cc65` folder and add them to the cc65 library.

##### time.h

All standard libray fuctions in `time.h`, with the exception of `clock_settime (clockid_t, const struct timespec)`, are available
in FB with some limitations, as explained below.

BF has no access to a system clock, however, the 6502bf emulator keeps track of the number of instructions being executed;
this is returned by the standard `clock()` function.

The `time()` function takes the value returend by `clock()` and divides it by `CLOCKS_PER_SEC` to have a (rough) estimate
of seconds passed since the program started. The file `<root>\examples\watch.c` can be used to test the clock;
it is supposed to print a line every second, but the timing will depend on how fast your machine is
(how many 6502 instructionsit executes in a second). You can fine tune `CLOCKS_PER_SEC` for your machine by changing 
`CPS` macro in `<root>\cc65\fbtime.c` (rebuild the libraries if you do so, as explained above).
Keep im mind `watch` can be so slow to not be able to print a line per second, no matter how low `CPS` is ;-)

##### srand()

Often, the below construct (or similar) is used to initialize the random number generator:

```
srand((unsigned) time(NULL));
```

Please notice that the above will compile successfully but, because `time()` and `clock()` are based on the number of 6502 instruction executed
up to that point in the code, they will always return same value at each execution, therefore the random number generator will always be
initialized with the same seed.

The only way to properly initialize the random number generator in FB, it to ask for a random seed to the user.



### Compiling Java

FB uses [b2fJ](https://github.com/mzattera/b2fJ) tiny Java virtual machine to convert Java code into a 6502 executable that is then
linked to the 6502bf BF emulator to produce final BF code.

You can invoke:

```
FB_java f
```

to compile `f.java` source file into `f.bf` BrainFuck code, `f.c` C code (for `f.bf`) and corresponding executable Windows file `f.exe`.

Again, if Python or C compilers have not been configured, compilation will stop at some intermediate steps.

b2fJ supports Java 1.8 but has a smaller standard Java library. Please refer to the [project website](https://mzattera.github.io/b2fJ/) for details.

Please notice that version 0.2.2 of b2fJ has a [bug](https://github.com/mzattera/b2fJ/issues/8) that limits the actual usefulness of the code that can be written;
it is still provided as a "proof of concept" of object oriented programming in BrainFuck.


  
## The 6502bf emulator

FuckBench uses a 6502 emulator written in FuckBrainFuck (`<root>\6502bf.fbf`) to translate 6502 code to BrainFuck.
The emulator implements a standard 6502 CPU, with the below caveats:

 * It does not support "decimal" mode of operations at the moment.
 * It uses the undocumentd opcode 66 (hex 42) to implement some "SYSCALLS", that is to expose some functionalities
   such as BrainFuck I/O or to interface with C libraries. Each functionality is identified by the content of the byte following the 66 opcode;
   functonalities are implemented in the `SYSCALL_` block in the emulator and also exposed as 6502 assembly macros in `<root>\cc65\6502bf.inc`.
 * It implements automatic loop detection for JMP/JSR/BRK/branch instructions; that is the emulator will quit if one of these instructions 
   jumps back to the instruction itself. This is used when testing the emulator.
  
### Changing 6502 emulator

If you change the emulator, please notice that the Java linker (`<root>\eclipse\6502bf tools\src\org\mzattera\bf6502\Linker.java` needs to know the position of the `mem` array
(this is the emulted 6502 memory).
 
### Compiling 6502 emulator

Run `<root>\bin\FB_build_emu.bat` to rebuild the 6502bf emulator (`<root>\6502bf.bf`).
The folder `<root>\test\ca65^` contains code to test the emulator, they are used by `FB_run_tests.bat` as ecplained below.



## Making a new release

`<root>\bin\FB_run_tests.bat` runs a battery of tests for FB; in the proces, it also rebuilds FB assets.
Because of this, it can be used as preparation for a new release. 
It can also used to run regression tests, enabling only some checks, as explained below.

  1. It will rebuild 6502bf emulator.
     This can be skipped with `-e` option from command line.
  2. It will rebuild and execute 6502 functional tests, in order to verify the emulator runs correctly.
     This can be skipped with `-f` option from command line.
  3. It will rebuild cc65 libraries.
     This can be skipped with `-l` option from command line.
  4. For each sub folder in `<root>\test`, it will compile files contained therein, execute them
     and compare their output with corresponding `.ref` file, issuing an error when they do not match.
     This can be skipped with `-t` option from command line.
  5. Providing the `-v` option, will print verbose output to console.

If all of the above tests ran successfully, FB will be re-built and it is ready for a release.

*Please notice that Python and C compiler must be configured to run regression tests.*